This picture was an old fiction guill to collect what he owed me for 20%. That
was around $300. It must have been for about 60,000 words a copy. One of the
things I wanted to ask you about was you started off with a sort of fantasy
science fiction story, Metal Man and then you went deeply into science fiction.
But I think one of your most fascinating things that I read was Darker Than You
Think. What caused the change in your writing? What caused that? Well, I'm not
sure except that people change and grow and sometimes decay and whatever. When I
wrote Darker Than You Think, I was under psychoanalysis. I was in Hollywood for
the conclusion of it. I first went to Dr. Tidd at the Menninger Institute in
Topeka, worked with him for about a year and broke off for a couple of years and
decided I needed some more, and heivesse moved to Beverly Hills in the meantime,
and I went out there and stayed another year. The psychiatrist and the story,
well,
reflects some of my attitudes toward Dr. Tidd, I think, so it's probably unfair
to him to say that, but it seems to me that looking back now at the story and
what it tries to say,
Will Barbee starts out in terror of the forces of darkness and in the end he
finds he's part of them. And that in a way is a reflection and my own
experience. That is, I can remember a time when I felt that I was involved in a
strong conflict between will and emotion and I made resolutions that were
difficult to keep and felt sort of divided against myself. And as a result of
partly of the analysis and partly of just growing up and living, when I feel
that I've got to be, well, better integrated so that I'm no longer so conscious
of internal conflicts, of wanting to do things that I don't do, of attempting to
make resolutions that I won't be able to keep and so forth. I just have a degree
of acceptance of myself, the unconscious of the whole human nature and so forth
that I didn't have. And I think that's probably the basic emotional structure of
the novel. You weren't attempting then? I mean did you have any serious ideas
about the Lycanthropy, the werewolf? That that was the reason for that kind of
genetic inheritance? Well, I think the lycanthropy is an excellent, apt or
whatever symbol for, let's say the quote dark forces of the unconscious. I
didn't certainly not have any serious belief in magic or lycanthropy or
whatever. It was pure fantasy or science fiction, but a fortunate invention.
because it was symbolic and expressive and so in its own way true. To go forward
a little bit, another book I wanted to ask you about is Brother to Demon,
Brother to Gods, more or less, on genetic engineering and so forth. I took that
book as fairly optimistic in its ending. I think it is. It was meant to be. I'm
certainly interested in genetic engineering. It seems to me that, Well, the big
scientific event of, well, 40 years ago, whenever it happened, was the splitting
of the atom and the unraveling of DNA has similar and more profound consequences
when we begin to realize them. And years ago, I wrote a novel in which, well, so
far as I know, I invented the term genetic engineering, though it may probably
have been around in other works, called Dragon's Island. But that was published
in 51, which was a couple of years before Watson and Crick made their great
breakthrough. And then, more recently, I decided to come back to it and to push
the possibilities of genetic engineering as far as I could imagine then. Would
you accept it? Is it something you're for? Well, I don't think it's a matter of
being for it or not. I think it's going to happen. I think that people are going
to be opposed to it and there'll be conflicts and so forth. But assuming that
science and technology remain alive while I think genetic engineering is going
forward, it has so many possible uses and the manufacture of insulin, the
manufacture of interferon, the possibilities for, let's say, improving health
and happiness and comfort and longevity are so, so vast that you can't imagine
people refusing to do it and, if we go ahead with it, and involves the potential
of improving or changing or tinkering with the human germplasm and rebuilding
the race itself. And, I say, it's fascinating to watch. And in the story where I
set up the Smithwick family as the creators and had them recreating their own
children so they would be better genetic engineers, generation after generation,
and set up these four creations. The true man who were genetically perfect, who
were happy and smart and peaceful and good citizens of society, and the mu-man
who were specialized for space or warfare or anything else. The gods ruled and
then discovering that the gods were created a little bit too much in the image
of man so that there needs to be another creation to supplant the gods and the
gods naturally don't want to be supplanted. It struck me that this was, let's
say, a beautiful dramatic situation with the essence of conflict and discovery
and revelation where these two naked kids on the Priman reservation faced with
the problem of keeping alive when the gods are after them to grow up and
discover what they are and make the elder mind to replace the gods. It was just
fun to do, let's say. And I wouldn't say that it's possible, but I wouldn't say
it's impossible. That is, I think that it is imaginative exploration of what
could happen. Would you say in that book that, that man is sort of controlling
his own evolution? Well, it seems to me we can control our own evolution and
that in a way is not very remarkable because for many thousands of years we've
been controlling the evolution of horses and cattle and dogs and so forth so
that, obviously, human evolution can be controlled. And since we're discovering,
let's say, decoding the genetic message, where we can do it more effectively and
genetically—effectively,
efficiently than it was ever done before. Sure. What about, this isn't exactly
the same kind of material but it is in a way, that story on Guinevere for
everybody about cloning.
Is cloning something you can foresee as possible or good, or— Well I can't
really see any good in it, not much good anyway, but it seems to me it's
possible. We can already clone frogs and with continual
refinement and laboratory processes and understanding and so forth, I can see
cloning human beings. But a human clone, as far as I can see, is essentially an
identical twin and not a sort of supernatural second self. So assuming that you
had clones, it seems to me that they would have to be grown-up individually and
educated individually, and they would not be doppelgangers or second selves or
instant duplicates of the donor or whatever, but I can't see why it shouldn't
happen. and it seems to me that there's a possibility of using the cloning
technique to, for example, to grow a new heart that would be a perfect
replacement of a normal heart because it's grown out of the same tissue, such
things as this. It might be possible to grow a whole series of implants and
replacements that would make life go on almost essentially forever. So far as I
know, the brain cells are not replaceable and they won't live forever, so I
can't see that as a real way to immortality. One more question on this
particular point, say in reference to cloning or genetic engineering. Would you
say that there is no area of science that man … I mean man can monkey with
anything he wants. Is there anything which we shouldn't touch, which would be
wrong for science to meddle with or monkey with? Well I suppose I'm a sort of
relativist.
Maybe I'm a Darwinian evolutionist. It's hard to find any absolute symbols or
standards of whatever, what is wrong and right. And if you look at the whole
evolutionary picture why some things, patterns of growth and ways of behavior
and so forth lead to the survival of the individual and the species and some
don't. And that's one available standard of behavior. And if you look at that,
why the technologists Technologists seem likely to survive and prevail unless
they destroy themselves and whatever is going to destroy the race is obviously
bad in that way and it seems to me when we open the atom we're skating on thin
ice and there might be similar hazards in genetic engineering. That is,
theoretically we could design a form of life that would wipe us out Maybe we
will. Maybe we need the humanoids to keep us from doing that. That's what
they're for, but personally, being sort of individualist, I hate to give up
completely to the humanoids. There is one more work, I keep forgetting about
this one, the CT work, CT ship, CT shock, is that the way that's pronounced?
Yes, it was abbreviated contritarrine, with the letters C and T, and I just
spelled it out. That was a work I did for Campbell and enjoyed doing it. I went to
him with the idea for a series of stories about the planetary engineers who
would terraform new worlds, that is, would rebuild them, tinker with the
atmosphere, the chemistry, maybe the gravitation, whatever, to make them
suitable for human settlement. and Campbell suggested that some of these new worlds
might be Ct that is antimatter which was pretty new science fiction then, and I
was fascinated and I did a series of stories and then a serial that eventually
became two novels and. Where did you come up with the concept terraform? Did you
coin that word or? As far as I know I invented the word. There are a few such
terms that I things that I can claim credit for such as terraforming and
psionics and the android is distinct from the robot and so forth. Didn't the C.T.
novel and the short stories lead into a syndicated strip in the newspapers? Yeah
that was one of my exciting adventures. I was sitting at my desk one day when
the phone rang and the editor of the New York Sunday News was on the line and
wanted to know if I would come to New York and write a comic strip. And I caught
my breath and said I would. They had read one of the CT novels reviewed in The
New York Times by a rather superior reviewer who said that the plot was pretty
interesting, but the way of writing made it look like a science fiction comic
strip. and this was in the early days of commercial TV when people were turning
on the tube on Sunday morning instead of buying the Sunday news and somebody
thought that if they had exclusive strips instead of syndicated strips that
everybody else had, it might give them a competitive edge. They originally
planned four new comics, including a western and a mystery and adventure, I
think, but the science fiction one was the only one they did. It ran for three
years, but eventually didn't turn out to be the answer to TV. But the artist was
Lee Elias, who used to work with Milt Kinniff on Terry and the Pirates and has a
nice clean cut style and was good with new and strange characters and good with
machines. The thing was fun to do. My heart was broken when it ended because I'd
come to enjoy getting regular chat. It was at that time that I went back part
-time into the academic world because I'd started taking college courses while
the strip was running because it didn't take all my time to write it. And I
asked for a graduate assistantship in math, and they didn't have one, but I was
steered to one in English, which turned out to be a fortunate choice. The
academic world did mesh very well with writing. It's wonderful to be paid to
read good literature and talk about it with a congenial group of students. I
enjoyed teaching and found that I was able to continue writing during holidays
and vacations. and maybe I learned a little bit more about literature and about
people and so forth. I think it was a very happy experience. Didn't you also put
together one of the first courses on science fiction? I think so. Mark Hilligus
at Colgate University wrote the first one that I knew about. That was written up
in the National Observer and I clipped the article out and showed it to the
curricular committee and the chairman at Eastern and got approval for a course.
What time was that? Heligus started his course in 62 and I started mine in 64. I
taught it for a dozen years and spent part of those years doing all I could to
promote academic science fiction elsewhere. I accumulated descriptions of other
courses and lectured and published articles and finally put together a textbook
for science fiction teachers, an anthology of articles by the likes of Asimov
and Le Guin and Gunn and others that has finally been published.
I have a question about your own opinion on this. This may not be a fair
question to ask of an author, but do
you have favorite books, favorite stories, characters, as you look back, that
you would, say, like most to be remembered for? You mean in my own way? Yeah, in
your own, yes. Well, I think Darker Than You Think is probably the thing, the
novel, that fell into place most pleasingly. When I look back on it, It seems
still to work. It's still engaging. It still means something. The Humanoids has
been my most successful, most widely translated novel. But the original
novelette with folded hands said essentially what I wanted to say in a more
compact and satisfying way so that I always felt the novelette was a better
story than the novel. MS-Mobile. That, in a way, has been my most successful and
popular work, the novelette. It's been reprinted many, many times. How many
languages has the human rights been translated into it? MS-Mobile. Well, I don't
know, but most of the Western European languages and Japan. Let's see, it's just
going into Serbo-Croatian and Hebrew.
It's gotten around. I want to ask something about your working method. When you
come up with a concept for a story, whatever it is, CT or humanoids, do you get
a concept and then find a story to fit it, or do you have a story that you shove
the concept into? Is there…
Well, I'd like to say I think that it just grows. I often begin with some sort
of abstract idea like, well, the conflict of primitivism and progress or
whatever, and I look for the essence of conflict in the basic idea and then try
to find characters or forces that would embody this conflict. And in the early
stages of it, where the whole thing is very flexible, almost flimsy, you can do
anything to it you want to turn it inside out. But if it works, it gradually
comes alive, and the characters become real, until they're, well, human beings
that I feel that I know, and any sort of change becomes very difficult to make.
I noticed looking over some of your manuscripts at Eastern New Mexico University
that you do revise. It seems to me that you had revise quite. Is that a normal
process of your writing, to go back over? Well, more and more. In the beginning
I saw myself as a pulp writer, and my idols in the pulp field were such figures
is Max Brand who was said to write 4,000 words every day including Sundays and
send it out in rough draft, and in the course of his life he said to publish
between 30 and 40 million words. And I tried to do that for years, and
sometimes, believe it or not, it worked. Most of my work for several years was
submitted in the first draft and often accepted and liked by the fans, but as
time goes on, I change, the market changes, I become, I guess, more conscious of
technique and of ways that things can go wrong. So nowadays, when I write a
paragraph, I have a tendency to take it apart and rewrite it instead of going
on, which was one reason for buying this new word processor, because it And it
seems to facilitate the revision immensely, you compose on a monitor and if you
don't like what you see there, well, you can overtype it or delete it or
whatever and save whatever's good without having to retype it.
How do you keep up with science? You must have a fairly extensive scientific
background or any good science fiction writer must. Well, I've always been, as I
said, fascinated with science as a sort of unfolding mystery. That is, I want to
know as much as I can about the nature of the origins of the universe. And I
subscribe to a whole group of magazines, Science News, Scientific American,
Science, which is the publication of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, which is much of it pretty technical, but some things in
it I can read and understand. I subscribe to a couple of astronomy magazines, I
subscribe to a couple of computer magazines since I bought the word processor,
and occasionally I get off to other events. My wife and I attended the Jupiter
flyby at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, March a year ago, and got a short story
out of that that I called a descent into the Great Red Spot, though I think the
editor is changing the name of it. And we've been invited back to the Saturn
flyby come November, and something like that, which gives you an opportunity to
see actual science at work and science unfolding, is about as exciting as
anything could be. The Jupiter flyby, while the pictures of Jupiter and its
satellites were coming in on the monitors, just one every 48 seconds. Most of
them, you knew, would never be seen again. They would select some for more
study, but most of them would disappear. And it was just exciting. It was like
exploring a new solar system. These satellites, up to that time, had just been
spots of light in a telescope. And at the nearest, the best approach is that you
You could see details just a few kilometers across. Each satellite was different
with a different history, with different clues about the origins of itself and
the whole solar system and maybe the universe. Things like that might make
science as interesting as anything I know. To change the subject again, let's
see, if I remember now, you have been President of the Science Fiction Writers
Association, or you still are? I finished my second term less than a month ago
and I hope now to get back to more science fiction now. The term is for how
long? Each term is only for one year. And it was a very rewarding experience. As
I guess I've said before, science fiction is a pretty small friendly close
community A lot of people in it have been good friends over the years. And it
was an opportunity to try to do something for science fiction. But it took a
good deal of time. What were your duties, if you don't mind? Well, we have about
500 members. We have all sorts of activities. One of the most important is a
grievance committee that tries to, let's say, avoid difficulties with editors
and publishers and so forth to make sure that they treat us right. We have the
nebula awards that are given each year to recognize work in the field. We
attempt to, well, sort of publicize and propagandize science fiction and there
are and many people in the organization who devote a lot of priceless time and
energy to this, but the whole thing has to be coordinated and people drop out
and have to be replaced, and misunderstandings developed that have to be somehow
explained, and new projects come along that need to be supported. and there
wasn't any one thing that took a great deal of time but there was a continual
flow of problems and minor decisions and so forth so that every week I'd have to
spend maybe a couple of days catching up on the mail and the phone calls and
whatever. What are the criteria for membership? Does everybody who Is everybody
automatically a member who publishes a story, or does it have to make an
application? No, you have to make an application. An affiliate member has to
have at least one story professionally published, and an active member, the
requirement for that is three stories, short stories, or short works. It doesn't
have to be fiction stories, or a longer work, such as a novel or whatever. The
dues now are $40 a year, and we have two publications, a monthly... Well,
between them they're monthly, a forum that is essentially for the members with
official business and market reports and whatever, and a bulletin that comes out
four times a year that is devoted to more general articles, background material
on science and science fiction. And the members are usually privileged to attend
a safwa suite at a convention. I'd say membership is a sort of ticket to a club
that I regard as exciting to belong to. You said there's some five hundred
members? Yes. That must be the largest—obviously the largest it's ever been,
probably. Oh yes, it has grown, still growing steadily. The science fiction
market is, well, until the last year or so was booming. Various publishers,
paperback publishers had regular plans to publish four, six, sometimes eight
titles a month. And so that, well, Charlie Brown of Locust was keeping a record
of the books published, and that kept growing until the total passed 1,000 a
year, about half reprint and half new, including fantasy as well as science
fiction. And I think that, well, since the Depression or whatever it was, where
many publishers have cut back their schedules, and it's a little harder for a
new writer to break in than it was, but it was still a very profitable and
exciting field compared to what it was. When there was one magazine and I got
twenty-five bucks for my first story, and of course the big money is from films
and TV and such things as that. I know you said that it's hard for you to keep
up with everything that's being published today, but do you have any
particularly favorite authors, the younger ones, starting in the last 10 years
or so, that you think are going to be valuable? Well, I don't follow well enough
to say anything very intelligent. When I was teaching, I regarded Ursula Le
Guin's Left Hand of Darkness as probably the best recent novel. I'm a great
admirer of Heinlein, especially the early Heinlein author Clark.
But, I don't really keep up. I just read and reread some of Gordon Dickson's
child's cycle, and impressed with a broad, optimistic view of human change and
evolution that he's presenting. What about New Wave authors? I guess the New
Wave technically has passed. I think so. What was your response to that? I felt
that the New Wave was — well, I was sort of anti-New Wave because I felt that
the New Wave people were — first of all they were intensely pessimistic about
science and they were trying to throw out the traditional accepted literary
patterns that at least were accepted by me and used in the field and turning
back to literary experiments by people like dos pasos and James Joyce that had
been tried a generation ago and then were brought on as they were something new
again but I think by and large, well let's say Some of the new-Wave writers were
very able, and the impact of the new wave has been to improve the awareness of
literary values of style and so forth. So by and large it's been a quote-good
thing. Is it possible to blend, say the mainstream or the new-Wave attempt with
good science fiction, or are they mutually exclusive or is it possible to have
good mainstream material at science fiction? Well, I'm not enthusiastic about
consolidating mainstream literature and science fiction, but I also remember
that there was a time when science fiction wasn't walled off in a category by
itself, and I don't think there's any reason it should be. When Wells was
publishing his stories, they were just novels or romances or whatever.
And science fiction was in a
sort of ghetto, quote, ghetto for a generation. I think this was partly due to
the fact that it was published in pulp magazines and people look down on the
pulp, and I think we're sort of getting over that. But, it's still a category, a
publisher's category, like westerns or gothics or love romances or whatever. And
that means that if Don Wilhelm or Judy Lynn Del Rey or someone else packages a
book in a recognizable science fiction package, it'll sell enough copies to make
a profit. But it's a sort of limited profit because it is shelved in the science
fiction rakes and the stands, and the general public doesn't see it. So people
who get to be best-sellers, successful, people like Vonnegut and so
forth tend to want to get the science fiction label off their stories when they
begin to sell enough copies, but I've never reached that stage myself. I'm proud
to have mine called science fiction. Well, you mentioned the general public.
Probably the general public wouldn't be included as, say, fans of science
fiction. Is science fiction always going to be a separate thing? Is it still
separate where you have to be a member almost of a cult or an in-group to...
Well, let's say some science fiction is. I think one thing, the most important
thing that's happened to the field is the diversification of it, that instead of
having one readership, we have many readerships, and there's, let's say, a
limited group that are interested in, let's say, the possibilities of hard
science and a serious look at science fiction to explore possibilities of future
social evolution, cultural change, the psychological impact of new technologies
or whatever. And there are more people who are interested in
characterization and story value and maybe literature is escape. So I think
that we won't just tell one science fiction, many varieties of it, but it seems
to me that as far as I can see ahead, there should be a public for, quote,
science fiction, just as there still is for Westerns and mysteries, is, or other
identifiable categories. You don't see a more of comparing, you're uniquely
qualified to do this, comparing the readership of science fiction today with say
back in the thirties or early forties, wouldn't you see a greater proportion of
the population reads and appreciates science fiction? I think
so. You know when I started nobody knew what it was you had to explain it. There
was one science fiction magazine though some science fiction stories were
running in magazines like Galaxy and people like Wells and Conan Doyle had been
publishing occasional science fiction for not for a specialised audience all
along, but certainly there were more people reading it now than there ever were
before, but there are a lot more people who see it on TV or see science fiction
movies than ever read any of it. When you go to a convention these days where
the Star Trek fans and the comic book fans and the Star Wars fans and so forth
sort of outnumber the science fiction fans, a couple A couple of weeks ago, I
was at a convention in Phoenix that was attended by, I think about 800 people. I
was really the only identifiable hard science fiction writer there. They were
Star Wars characters, there were comic book authors and so forth who had the big
public. I'm no complaint about that. You don't think that hurts the kind of
science fiction you value more, say, the movies, the television, that kind of
material? Well, movies have very seldom been good science fiction. There have
been a few good science fiction films, but science fiction, or the sort I like,
has been called a literature of ideas, and to some extent it is. and the films I
think necessarily deal not in ideas but with emotions, with sensation. I just
saw The Shining, and I liked it as a superb piece of filmatic craftsmanship.
Kubrick wanted to scare the socks off the audience and by and large he did about
as well as anybody ever will. Now, there are people who feel that he neglected
characterization, who feel that the explanation of the supernatural is not
consistent, but I feel that Kubrick knew what he was doing, and he did it.
Considering consistency, it seems to me that he was making a deliberate appeal
to the irrational, to the inexplicable, to the totally mysterious. And if he
tried to explain all the ghosts
Well, 2001 I think was tremendous and there are a number of others that are
regarded as classics but typically the movies and TV haven't done what you've
done. might have been done. In the first year or two of Star Trek, they were
buying professionally published science fiction stories or stories written by
professional writers, and I thought many of them were pretty good. Gradually as
time went on, they went more and more into the most standard Hollywood format
had less and less originality, creativity and so forth. Well,
Space 1999 and Battlestar Galactica, are worse. That is, they have plenty of
money for all sorts of expensive special effects, but they have a contempt for
the intelligence of the audience. that is they don't care about ideas about
consistency or whatever, all they're trying to do is create an emotional effect
that if you know too much of science or care too much about believability well
the emotional effect doesn't work. I'm about to ask a very broad question so you
can feel free to edit it down to better size. What do you think goes into making
a good science fiction story?
Well, of course I'm something of a believer myself in emotional effects, that is
you need a strong conflict and you need something that will involve the reader
emotionally so that you need characters that he can either hate or identify
with. You need some sense of originality. you need, if you get it, something
new, though that isn't always possible. I tend myself to, well, to look for a
theme for some sort of significant statement about science, or the future or the
impact of science and technology on individual human beings, on human life, on
society, on what the world might be. But I think all that is as important is for
the writer to be genuinely interested in what he is saying about something
relevant to the science and technology and change. It seems to me the essential
thing is probably that science fiction recognizes that the world is changing
under the impact of technology. The future's going to be different. And the
mainstream, quote, audience either doesn't know this or prefers to forget it or
whatever. That's a good distinction to make. I was gonna ask you, is that
something you You are presented in your classes when you taught science fiction,
it is concern with change and distinction of mainstream material. Speaking of
your teaching, why do you think science fiction, say, should be taught, say far
down as junior high, junior high, high school, college? Is there any particular
value it can offer students? Well I think that assuming that science fiction
does deal with change that the world is really changing, so the recognition of
this is an element of reality or realism that you don't have in a lot of classic
literature. And kids growing up are going to be living in a world that's
different from the world around them now. It seems to me they have a legitimate
interest in what the future is going to be. And in a practical teaching
situation, You're trying to pull kids off the playground, out of in front of TV
and teach them to read, and to understand, and to think. And so sometimes this
is pretty difficult. I've tried various approaches to various literary figures
and periods. And some of them work very well, and some of them don't. And it
seems to me that science fiction offers a sort of bridge, or door, or whatever,
to the interests of a lot of students that you don't have if you try to go back
to Shakespeare, let's say.
I think one thing science fiction forces a person who's reading it to do is to
think about the future, and to think about the world He's living in as it's
related to the future. I think that's basically what it's about really as much
as you can say this about anything, and it seems to me that generally you can
classify it more or less as utopian and dystopian and that is that you can look
for some assumption that technology is good or that technology is bad, that the
future is going to be better or the future is going to be worse, or that the
human being is a helpless victim of his environment and his own nature or that
he can make significant decisions and change his environment and make things
better than they were. Storia. So that was basically the approach I took in my
classes, beginning, well I like to begin with the second two books of Gulliver's
Progress, which is written as deliberate criticism of the early scientists of
the Royal Society and so forth, and to present, as far as I could, selected
stories that will be briefs on both sides. Dystopias and utopias, optimism and
pessimism—selection from such people as, well, Clark and Heinlein and so forth
on one side and maybe my own humanoids, there's plenty of dystopian fiction,
usually better written and more engaging than the optimistic science fiction.
Well, though, if you're going to categorize like that, say you put Wells and
Huxley and Swift, maybe Ellison on the one hand, maybe Heinlein, Asimov, people
like that on the other, I would put you on that side, the second side, with the
Optimists or the Utopians, ultimately, even though you did write The Humanites.
Well, that's where I'd like to be. Okay. That's fair. Hey, but I've only got one
more question. I'm done. The tape's brought out, too.
Maybe I misinterpreted something you wrote, Dr. Williamson, but I thought I read
somewhere where you were skeptical of the possibility of finding intelligent
alien life elsewhere. No, I don't, I don't think I, well, I'm skeptical about
our actually finding it because the universe is so vast and communication is so
difficult. There are two chains of probability or whatever. It's been proven
that, let's say, the stuff of life originates elsewhere, even in galactic clouds
before there are any planets. So the stuff of life is there, and life could
theoretically develop on any planet, and according to the best theories, the
galaxy is full of planets, so it ought to be there. But on the other hand, we
have a record of evolution for four and a half billion years or whatever in the
solar system, and there's no evidence that anything alien ever turned up here.
And at our best speed so far, it would take many thousand years to get to
another world, and I'm just skeptical that the flying saucers are interplanetary
visitors or whatever. But I can see a possibility of, I say, radio communication
picking up radio signals or laser signals or something else. But it also seems
that this would have to go at the speed of light, which takes 100,000 years to
cross the galaxy.
So any very intimate conversation would take a lot of time.
Well, you've invented a couple ways for people to go faster than I have, haven't you?
Yes.
A very fond of Jerry Feinberg for the invention of the taekyeon that I've adopted.
And I've invented other devices of my own, and I regard these as necessary for, let's say, pieces of fictional machinery.
but I'm not sure they're going to work in reality. People keep saying that
the Einstein speed of light limit is not absolute but there's a good deal to be
said for it in practical terms. But to summarize, in other words, you're not
skeptical about the existence or the possibility of intelligent life, just that
we would be able to contact it. Right, that's it. I don't see why it shouldn't
be there. Of course there's a sort of appalling possibility that an evolving
species opens up the atom and commits instantaneous suicide, but you can hope
that wouldn't always happen.